Continue the Novalist audit implementation from the dev branches on this Mac.

Current user direction: use simulators only for device runtime work; commit and push validated fixes to dev. Actual Apple CI trigger/failure acceptance is complete; preserve its evidence and do not repeat the completed probe PRs. Automatic approval review rejected an optional repeat workflow dispatch because the required CI cases were complete; it was not retried. Later fixes have local native acceptance rather than a new CI pass. Do not run physical-device acceptance, merge CI probes into dev, or publish a release. Physical-device requirements remain deferred rather than waived. Preserve the incomplete overall goal.

Set a goal to finish all 73 original findings. Keep that goal incomplete until every required native acceptance criterion is met; portable passes and this handoff are not completion.

All 73 original findings have implementation changes. The ledger records 67 verified findings and six awaiting complete Apple runtime acceptance: M01, M03, M05, M06, R15 and P01. M02, M04, R13 and R14 are now verified. Finish the feasible simulator acceptance and fix concrete regressions; do not add full new features or redesign unrelated code. A compiled web bundle or portable test is not an iOS runtime pass.

Current Mac evidence: all nine verify-native.sh checks passed at clean revision 0558dda71a395b6ab6208dd6820cc19811a61430 on macOS 27.0.1, Xcode 27.0/iOS SDK 27.0, .NET SDK 10.0.401 with workload 10.0.401.1, Node 26 and Python 3.14.7. Sanitized logs and checks.tsv are in macos-validation/native-compile; original raw logs remain locally in native-run.yWxiXr. Six MobileTemporaryAccessTests passed on this Mac; see macos-validation/mobile-temporary-access-run.json. The local invalid-symbol failure and probe-free clean rebuild also passed; see macos-validation/m05-invalid-symbol-build.json. These checks do not establish native scope balance, actual CI triggers or physical-device behavior.

The unsigned simulator app initially failed launch with CODESIGNING Invalid Page. Rebuilding unchanged production source using EnableCodeSigning=true and CodesignKey=- passed deep signature verification and launched on an iPhone 17 Pro Max simulator with iOS 27.0. See macos-validation/simulator-launch.json. Commit 0c789b29581db47d89593c897bd53fbb3fb9275c adds --no-audit to Apple CI dependency restoration and is pushed to dev. Read macos-validation/native-acceptance.json for current per-case results before repeating work.

Actual CI evidence: independent Core-only, SDK-only and renderer-only Apple PR runs 37595132709, 37595136026 and 37595142216 passed. An intentional iOS #error failed run 37595331474 with CS1029; removing it produced clean passing run 37595706669. PRs 36–39 are closed without merge; branches remain for review. Exact base/probe/checked-out merge revisions and sanitized logs are retained in macos-validation/m05-ci/summary.json and its sibling records.

Supporting simulator lifecycle evidence now covers scene, Research and full Manuscript edits followed immediately by Home, termination, relaunch and reopening. See simulator-ui/scene-lifecycle.json, research-lifecycle.json and manuscript-lifecycle.json. Physical-device acceptance, lock, two dirty panes, conflicts and reordered save acknowledgements remain pending.

The same three lifecycle subsets passed again with the native evaluator correction using fresh fixtures and absent-before/new markers; on-disk default-draft scene and Research-item ownership was verified. See simulator-ui/lifecycle-fixed-summary.json and fixed-build-provenance.json for exact source patch/helper hashes and logs. Actual iPad simulator data-container relocation also passed after verified backup, uninstall/reinstall and old-path data restore: container UUID changed, app/identity hashes stayed equal, and retained markers reopened. See simulator-ui/container-relocation.json. Actual Files-visible external matching-suffix relocation subsequently passed; see macos-validation/m03-external/summary.json. Physical relocation remains deferred.

M04 exposed a concrete native crash: real associated WebContent termination aborted the host because NSErrorException escaped MAUI's async-void evaluation mapper. The native correction in RendererHostPage.JavaScript.cs, committed and pushed as 8489c9a3fa3b14b3cc695cef1b6d162b3d9aa3ab, awaits WKWebView.EvaluateJavaScriptAsync directly, with callers retaining their existing MainThread dispatch and bounded recovery deadlines. Native NSError and actual WebContent termination now reach Reload/Later without host abort; see macos-validation/m04-prefixed-webkit-crash.json, m04-fixed-evaluator-native-failure.json and m04-fixed-webcontent-termination.json. Preserve the fixed instrumented patch hash 2d88274ef724e09d0bdfc0bd3a4885112d88f7d80002594cc5730a6f431795e8. Actual native Reload passed all four fault modes; new defaultProjectRoot calls prove reconnection after termination, timeout and backend failure. The earlier transport subset is superseded by simulator-ui/m04-full/summary.json: all four faults now pass actual Reload, retained-edit recovery and exactly-once mutation checks. Native NSError and actual WebContent death recovered markers absent from disk. Probes were removed and clean builds passed between independent cases; M04 is verified. The proactive journal fix and later combined build have separate source manifests. Journal, Research and owned-path corrections with tests/native evidence were committed and pushed as dd9817e3. A simulator export/share test exposed premature cleanup during a pending native share; the correction passed delayed actual Save to Files acceptance and was pushed as 624533d8. See macos-validation/simulator-ui/m05-smoke/summary.json. See macos-validation/m04-fixed-reload-summary.json. The completed CI probes used pushed base 0c789b29, while the newer native correction has separate simulator/source evidence and passed final probe-free clean-build attribution and was pushed as 8489c9a3.

The actual production projectImages loader/native host passed asynchronous source, project/cache and dismissal races on the iPhone 17 Pro simulator. Native image decode, accessible >16 MiB rejection and unchanged disk hashes/relative fixture references passed too; full scene/map/Research/3D media integrations and memory remain separate. All six checks passed again with the fixed evaluator; see macos-validation/native-media-races-fixed.json. R14 is verified after all probes were removed, 568 production inputs matched final root source, and a fresh ad-hoc build/signature/install/launch passed. See macos-validation/final-clean-build.json; final source patch SHA256 is e1be8f17101ec55093aadd2c7c47a2f0e063f7ffd3295977756eec9f5052b2b4.

Simulator offline Help passed all 47 actual pages and all 11 screenshots at 1440x900 with browser-enforced HTTP(S) blocking; external fetch rejection was verified. See macos-validation/offline-help.json. This is neither physical airplane-mode evidence nor an iPhone/iPad performance measurement. Media/Help evidence records source 0c789b29581db47d89593c897bd53fbb3fb9275c plus probe diff 2580103702a3a67ac99bc3680b0f61b8c7a3ef9f39c55e8d5396a01fefc26ca0; their later probe removal and clean final-source attribution are recorded separately in macos-validation/final-clean-build.json.

Read AGENTS.md and CLAUDE.md, then artifacts/audit-2026-10-06/implementation.html, implementation-progress.json and native-handoff.fragment.html. The immutable pre-fix baseline is audit.html plus findings.json. Preserve its original revision references; do not regenerate build-report.py against the fixed source just to refresh the implementation status.

Continue on the local dev branch without discarding existing changes or local commits. Record the actual source revision and any dirty diff tested. For cross-repository source links and extension verification, use sibling novalist-aiassistant, novalist-extension and novalist-extension-gallery directories and their corresponding dev changes. The singular novalist-extension directory may alias the existing plural novalist-extensions clone. The legacy novalist-pnp and novalist-qwentts links describe separate historical compatibility evidence; they are not prerequisites for native mobile testing. Do not publish a release or install into an existing working extension folder as part of this continuation.

The legacy dev branches received metadata-only publication. The Qwen historical loader evidence used an unpublished local 0.4 fixture, whereas the pushed manifest is the existing 0.3 version. Do not claim a fresh clone contains that local fixture or that its historical result directly validates a different published source. Consult publication-extensions.json for exact publication scope.

Use synthetic projects and dedicated simulators for the current work. Verify the pinned prerequisites against the current repository: .NET SDK 10.0.401 with maui-ios workload 10.0.401.1, Xcode with iOS 27.0 SDK and matching simulator, current Node 22 LTS (22.13+) or a supported newer release, Python 3, and .NET 8 for shared tests. If a prerequisite differs, record the exact mismatch rather than silently changing project target versions.

The following checks have passed; rerun from the repository root only when changed source or a concrete failure requires it:

  dotnet workload install maui-ios --version 10.0.401.1
  bash artifacts/audit-2026-10-06/verify-native.sh
  dotnet test tests/Novalist.Core.Tests/Novalist.Core.Tests.csproj --filter 'FullyQualifiedName~MobileTemporaryAccessTests' -m:1 -nr:false

Only install the workload if it is missing. verify-native.sh restores renderer dependencies with npm ci --no-audit, runs typecheck, transport tests, mobile renderer build, Apple build regressions and python3 tools/check-source.py, builds an unsigned simulator app and compiles the device speech archive. It stops on failure and writes separate logs. Preserve the logs; investigate failures before repeating checks. The six MobileTemporaryAccessTests cover disposal, replacement, old-page late picker replies, concurrent cleanup and failing release callbacks. Their portable pass does not prove native security-scope balance.

Do not run npm audit or upload the dependency inventory. A separate npm metadata audit remains pending explicit approval because it sends package/version information to the registry; prior approval review rejected that request. Dependency restoration with --no-audit is distinct from that pending audit.

Install/launch on a dedicated simulator using the commands and selected UDID in implementation.html, with -p:EnableCodeSigning=true -p:CodesignKey=- for local ad-hoc signing. The verification script remains unsigned intentionally for compile-only validation. Do not substitute a web-asset-only reload for rebuilding the modified native host. Signed physical-device commands and provisioning prerequisites are retained for later acceptance; do not execute them under the current simulator-only direction.

Run and record simulator scenarios individually in macos-validation/native-acceptance.json. The original required acceptance below remains in scope; physical-device cases are deferred and the actual CI portion is already proven:

M01: Immediately background/lock/terminate after editing scenes, manuscript and Research, including two dirty panes and disk conflicts. Verify saved or recovered markers, exact project/book/draft ownership and no silent overwrite. Include a newer edit arriving before an older save acknowledgement.
M02: Verified. Actual native folder pick/cancel/reselect/create/open/close, manuscript preview/cancel/reselect/Import/Close, late old-page picker isolation after real WebContent termination, and full moved-parent sibling-project recents/identity passed. Native counts ended 9/9/zero retained in move run and 4/4/zero retained in actual import follow-up. All probes removed and clean build/signature/install/native UI/relaunch passed. Preserve macos-validation/m02/summary.json and m02-ui/summary.json; no physical-device result is implied.
M03: Actual simulator container relocation with stable identity and retained markers passed. A successive-move registry bug was fixed by recording exact aliases before recents publication and serializing atomic writes. Nine focused tests and two actual consecutive simulator moves without project opening passed; see macos-validation/m03-successive/summary.json. The actual Files-visible external matching-suffix simulator case also passed without redirection; see macos-validation/m03-external/summary.json. Only required physical relocation remains deferred.
M04: Verified. The final ownership helper also passed native NSError and real WebContent termination recovery/nonreplay, then clean integrated build/signature/install/UI; see macos-validation/r13-memory/evaluator-regressions/summary.json. Preserve simulator-ui/m04-full/summary.json and its exact source scope, per-case observations and intervening clean-build evidence. Native NSError,15.005s evaluator timeout, backend disposal and actual associated WebContent death passed recovery/nonreplay. Later M03/R13 fixes are excluded from that test patch; macos-validation/all-fixes-native-build.json proves combined clean build and UI readiness.
M05: Actual Core-only, SDK-only and renderer-only Apple PR jobs, intentional invalid-symbol PR failure and clean follow-up passed. Preserve macos-validation/m05-ci evidence. Signed-device create/edit/relaunch/import/share smoke remains deferred. Simulator create/import plus edit/relaunch and actual delayed EPUB Save to Files passed; preserve exact per-step source attribution in macos-validation/simulator-ui/m05-smoke/summary.json. This does not replace physical acceptance.
M06: Native simulator denial, Settings grant, retry to Listening, explicit Stop and Home/foreground interruption passed; see simulator-ui/microphone-summary.json. The permission change caused a fresh process; do not claim same-process stale-error recovery. Physical microphone behavior, call/audio-route interruption and actual audio quality remain pending.
R13: Native image decode, accessible oversized-image rejection and retained file hashes/relative references passed through production loading. Real Research image/PDF rendering, WAV/MP4 playback, accessible oversized errors and unchanged references/hashes passed after CSP/error fixes; see macos-validation/r13/summary.json. Actual scene/map nested frames and 3D texture rendering pass; the high-DPI canvas correction is pushed as af9f44d3 with browser DPR regressions and clean native evidence in macos-validation/r13-frames/summary.json. R13 is verified: the repeated-preview native memory failure was isolated to NSString constructor ownership in the installed binding and corrected with explicit created-reference transfer. The same 69-preview workload now settles at 259.50 MiB versus 901.11 MiB before, with zero retained large string buffers and cache maximum 28,326,744 bytes. No forced GC was used in acceptance. Six native media/races, probe removal, clean native build/signature/install/Research UI passed. See macos-validation/r13-memory/summary.json. The helper is pushed as 9ec4bcf2; final NSError/actual WebContent termination recovery and clean integration of all 1,257 production inputs passed in r13-memory/evaluator-regressions/summary.json. This is defined simulator acceptance, not physical performance or indefinite endurance.
R14: Verified. Actual source/project/dismissal races passed again with the fixed evaluator, and subsequent probe removal plus final clean build/signature/launch are proven. Preserve those results; do not reopen the finding without new contrary evidence.
R15: Test iPhone VoiceOver and iPad hardware keyboard focus, nested dialogs, Escape, focus return and portrait/landscape layouts.
P01: Controlled native simulator build pair passed from 8489c9a3 with only historical manual-plugin.ts versus corrected plugin changed; entry 16,140,902→3,458,437 bytes. See macos-validation/p01-native-pair/summary.json. Physical build/measurement acceptance is separate: compare original versus corrected manual-image packaging with otherwise identical source/build settings on available supported iPhone and iPad hardware. Alternate at least five fresh-process launches; record usability timing, app/WebKit memory and a separate JavaScriptCore parsing trace. State cache/thermal/device conditions honestly. Open every Help page and decode all 11 screenshots offline. Windows V8/working-set measurements are retained in p01-desktop/summary.json and do not substitute for iOS results.

Maintain per-case pass/fail/not-run records with simulator/device model and OS, source revision, scenario, observed result and compact evidence filenames. Simulator observations can support physical-required cases but cannot pass their physical acceptance. Use synthetic markers; exclude manuscript text, credentials, project identities and personal paths from committed logs. Remove fault-injection edits and run a clean build before attributing results to final source. Follow the repository's source gates and Aislop rules for any fixes. Keep desktop changelog rules; mobile-only validation is not a desktop release note. Commit and push validated fixes to dev. Keep temporary CI probe branches separate and do not merge their changes.

Update source workstream ledgers before regenerating the report. progress-renderer.json owns R13/R14/R15/P01 details. Root-owned mobile records are generated by root_progress() inside build-implementation-report.py, so changing progress-root.json alone is overwritten. Add durable native verification records to progress-validation.json (per-finding entries are supported), and update/remove the corresponding pending requirements at their source. The merger unions pending lists; an empty override alone does not clear an older pending requirement.

Then run:

  python3 artifacts/audit-2026-10-06/build-implementation-report.py
  node artifacts/audit-2026-10-06/verify-implementation.cjs

If the report verifier lacks its Chromium executable, install the pinned local Playwright browser once with node app/node_modules/@playwright/test/cli.js install chromium, then rerun that verifier. This browser dependency is not included in the handoff artifacts.

Recheck the report's links, counts, pending list and honest delivery state. Keep findings pending when hardware, signing, real termination, relocation or CI evidence is unavailable; identify the exact blocker. Mark the overall goal complete only when every required original acceptance case is met. Request input only for a concrete missing credential/device/choice that cannot be resolved independently.

This clone carries curated reports, ledgers, builders, native procedures and compact evidence. Cached SDKs/Electron binaries, Linux packages, test profiles, large traces, full coverage output and optional local hardware-inventory details were deliberately omitted. See commit-artifacts.json for the retained paths and limitations. No inference should be made that omitted raw evidence is present on this Mac.

The retained p01-desktop runtime harness uses Windows executable paths and is method documentation for the recorded Windows measurements. For the iOS comparison, use the original manual plugin from commit ba8b6d328b64ded6e923baa25ce086d7e9e799e4 with otherwise identical current sources; HEAD now contains the corrected plugin. Adapt measurement tooling to the actual Apple runtime instead of treating the Windows harness as a device test.
